README.md, before:

# Mouse Tracker for Cubism

A library that tracks mouse cursor location and microphone input and
converts them into Live2D® Cubism SDK parameters.

This is a spin-off project from [Facial Landmarks for Cubism](https://github.com/adrianiainlam/facial-landmarks-for-cubism).
The objective is to provide similar functionality, but requiring much
less CPU load, which can be critical if the processor does not support
AVX instructions. It also does not require the use of a dataset which
restricts commercial use, and it does not require a webcam.

*Disclaimer: This library is designed for use with the Live2D® Cubism SDK.
It is not part of the SDK itself, and is not affiliated in any way with Live2D
Inc. The Live2D® Cubism SDK belongs solely to Live2D Inc. You will need to
agree to Live2D Inc.'s license agreements to use the Live2D® Cubism SDK.*

Video demo (comparing Mouse Tracker with Facial Landmarks, testing on OBS):
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MA7H3v9dtxM>

## Supporting environments

This library is designed for Linux (or other *nix systems) with X11 and
PulseAudio.

I have made use of one C++17 library (`<filesystem>`)
in the example program, but it should be straightforward to change this
if you don't have C++17 support.

## Build instructions

1. Install dependencies.

   You will require a recent C/C++ compiler, `make`, `patch`, CMake >= 3.16,
   libxdo, PulseAudio, and readline. To compile the example
   program you will also require the OpenGL library (and its dev headers)
   among other libraries required for the example program. The libraries I
   had to install (this list may not be exhaustive) are:

       libxdo-dev libpulse-dev libgl1-mesa-dev libxrandr-dev libxinerama-dev libxcursor-dev libxi-dev libglu1-mesa-dev libreadline-dev

2. Clone this repository

       git clone https://github.com/adrianiainlam/mouse-tracker-for-cubism.git

3. To build the library only: (Skip this step if you want to build the example
   program. It will be done automatically.)

       cd <path of the git repo>
       ./build.sh

To build the example program:

4. Download "Cubism 4 SDK for Native R1" from the Live2D website:
   <https://www.live2d.com/en/download/cubism-sdk/download-native/>.

   Extract the archive -- put the "CubismSdkForNative-4-r.1" folder under
   the "example" folder of this repo.

   Note: The Cubism SDK is the property of Live2D and is not part of this
   project. You must agree to Live2D's license agreements to use it.

5. Go into the
   "example/CubismSdkForNative-4-r.1/Samples/OpenGL/thirdParty/scripts"
   directory and run

       ./setup_glew_glfw

6. Go back to the "example" directory and run

       ./build.sh

7. Now try running the example program. From the "example" directory:

       cd ./demo_build/build/make_gcc/bin/Demo/
       ./Demo


## Command-line arguments for the example program

Most command-line arguments are to control the Cubism side of the program.
Only one argument (`--config`) is used to specify the configuration file
for the Facial Landmarks for Cubism library.

 * `--window-width`, `-W`: Specify the window width
 * `--window-height`, `-H`: Specify the window height
 * `--window-title`, `-t`: Specify the window title
 * `--root-dir`, `-d`: The directory at which the "Resources" folder will
   be found. This is where the model data will be located.
 * `--scale-factor`, `-f`: How the model should be scaled
 * `--translate-x`, `-x`: Horizontal translation of the model within the
   window
 * `--translate-y`, `-y`: Vertical translation of the model within the window
 * `--model`, `-m`: Name of the model to be used. This must be located inside
   the "Resources" folder.
 * `--config`, `-c`: Path to the configuration file for the Mouse Tracker
   for Cubism library. See below for more details.

## Configuration file

There are fewer tweakable parameters compared to the Facial Landmarks
library, but I have still kept the configuration file to allow some
customization. The file
"config.txt" lists and documents all parameters and their default values.
You can change the values there and pass it to the example program using
the `-c` argument. If using the library directly, the path to this file
should be passed to the constructor (or pass an empty string to use
default values).

## License

The library itself is provided under the MIT license. By "the library itself"
I refer to the following files that I have provided under this repo:

 * src/mouse_cursor_tracker.cpp
 * include/mouse_cursor_tracker.cpp
 * and if you decide to build the binary for the library, the resulting
   binary file (typically build/libMouseTrackerForCubism.a)

The license text can be found in LICENSE-MIT.txt, and also at the top of
the .cpp and .h files.

The example program is a patched version of the sample program provided
by Live2D (because there's really no point in reinventing the wheel),
and as such, as per the licensing restrictions by Live2D, is still the
property of Live2D.

The patch file (example/demo.patch) contains lines showing additions by
me, as well as deleted lines and unchanged lines for context. The deleted
and unchanged lines are obviously still owned by Live2D. For my additions,
where substantial enough for me to claim ownership, I release them under
the Do What the Fuck You Want to Public License, version 2. The full license
text can be found in LICENSE-WTFPL.txt.

All other files not mentioned above that I have provided in this repo
(i.e. not downloaded and placed here by you), *excluding* the two license
documents and files generated by Git, are also released under the Do What
the Fuck You Want to Public License, version 2, whose full license text
can be found in LICENSE-WTFPL.txt.

In order to use example program, or in any other way use this library
with the Live2D® Cubism SDK, you must agree to the license by Live2D Inc.
Their licenses can be found here:
<https://www.live2d.com/en/download/cubism-sdk/download-native/>.

This is not a license requirement, but if you find my library useful,
I'd love to hear from you! Send me an email at spam(at)adrianiainlam.tk --
replacing "spam" with the name of this repo :).

## Contributions

Contributions welcome! This is only a hobby weekend project so I don't
really have many environments to test it on. Feel free to submit
issues or pull requests on GitHub, or send questions or patches to me
(see my email address above) if you prefer email. Thanks :)

Commit message:

Use editline instead of GNU Readline
GNU Readline is GPL and so I can't link to it from this MIT-license project.

Including editline as a submodule.

README.md, after:

# Mouse Tracker for Cubism

A library that tracks mouse cursor location and microphone input and
converts them into Live2D® Cubism SDK parameters.

This is a spin-off project from [Facial Landmarks for Cubism](https://github.com/adrianiainlam/facial-landmarks-for-cubism).
The objective is to provide similar functionality, but requiring much
less CPU load, which can be critical if the processor does not support
AVX instructions. It also does not require the use of a dataset which
restricts commercial use, and it does not require a webcam.

*Disclaimer: This library is designed for use with the Live2D® Cubism SDK.
It is not part of the SDK itself, and is not affiliated in any way with Live2D
Inc. The Live2D® Cubism SDK belongs solely to Live2D Inc. You will need to
agree to Live2D Inc.'s license agreements to use the Live2D® Cubism SDK.*

Video demo (comparing Mouse Tracker with Facial Landmarks, testing on OBS):
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MA7H3v9dtxM>

## Supporting environments

This library is designed for Linux (or other *nix systems) with X11 and
PulseAudio.

I have made use of one C++17 library (`<filesystem>`)
in the example program, but it should be straightforward to change this
if you don't have C++17 support.

## Build instructions

1. Install dependencies.

   You will require a recent C/C++ compiler, `make`, `patch`, CMake >= 3.16,
   libxdo, and PulseAudio. To compile the example
   program you will also require the OpenGL library (and its dev headers)
   among other libraries required for the example program. The libraries I
   had to install (this list may not be exhaustive) are:

       libxdo-dev libpulse-dev libgl1-mesa-dev libxrandr-dev libxinerama-dev libxcursor-dev libxi-dev libglu1-mesa-dev

2. Clone this repository including its submodule (editline)

       git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/adrianiainlam/mouse-tracker-for-cubism.git

3. To build the library only: (Skip this step if you want to build the example
   program. It will be done automatically.)

       cd <path of the git repo>
       ./build.sh

To build the example program:

4. Download "Cubism 4 SDK for Native R1" from the Live2D website:
   <https://www.live2d.com/en/download/cubism-sdk/download-native/>.

   Extract the archive -- put the "CubismSdkForNative-4-r.1" folder under
   the "example" folder of this repo.

   Note: The Cubism SDK is the property of Live2D and is not part of this
   project. You must agree to Live2D's license agreements to use it.

5. Go into the
   "example/CubismSdkForNative-4-r.1/Samples/OpenGL/thirdParty/scripts"
   directory and run

       ./setup_glew_glfw

6. Go back to the "example" directory and run

       ./build.sh

   Note: I have observed that sometimes, on the first build, a failure
   will be reported, such as:

       [ 98%] Completed 'editline'
       [ 98%] Built target editline
       Makefile:149: recipe for target 'all' failed
       make: *** [all] Error 2

   I have no idea why, but seems like running build.sh again solves the
   issue. Please open an issue / contact me if not.

7. Now try running the example program. From the "example" directory:

       cd ./demo_build/build/make_gcc/bin/Demo/
       ./Demo


## Command-line arguments for the example program

Most command-line arguments are to control the Cubism side of the program.
Only one argument (`--config`) is used to specify the configuration file
for the Facial Landmarks for Cubism library.

 * `--window-width`, `-W`: Specify the window width
 * `--window-height`, `-H`: Specify the window height
 * `--window-title`, `-t`: Specify the window title
 * `--root-dir`, `-d`: The directory at which the "Resources" folder will
   be found. This is where the model data will be located.
 * `--scale-factor`, `-f`: How the model should be scaled
 * `--translate-x`, `-x`: Horizontal translation of the model within the
   window
 * `--translate-y`, `-y`: Vertical translation of the model within the window
 * `--model`, `-m`: Name of the model to be used. This must be located inside
   the "Resources" folder.
 * `--config`, `-c`: Path to the configuration file for the Mouse Tracker
   for Cubism library. See below for more details.

## Configuration file

There are fewer tweakable parameters compared to the Facial Landmarks
library, but I have still kept the configuration file to allow some
customization. The file
"config.txt" lists and documents all parameters and their default values.
You can change the values there and pass it to the example program using
the `-c` argument. If using the library directly, the path to this file
should be passed to the constructor (or pass an empty string to use
default values).

## License

The library itself is provided under the MIT license. By "the library itself"
I refer to the following files that I have provided under this repo:

 * src/mouse_cursor_tracker.cpp
 * include/mouse_cursor_tracker.cpp
 * and if you decide to build the binary for the library, the resulting
   binary file (typically build/libMouseTrackerForCubism.a)

The license text can be found in LICENSE-MIT.txt, and also at the top of
the .cpp and .h files.

This library depends on "editline" which is included here as a git
submodule. The fork used here was originally written by Simmule
Turner and Rick Salz, made available under the Spencer License 94,
now maintained by Joachim Wiberg. See "lib/editline/LICENSE" for more
information.

(Note: An earlier version of this library linked to GNU Readline as
a dependency. I have made a mistake and assumed GNU Readline was LGPL,
when in fact it was GPL. This has been corrected within 24 hours, by
replacing GNU Readline with editline instead. I apologize to the
copyright holders of GNU Readline.)

The example program is a patched version of the sample program provided
by Live2D (because there's really no point in reinventing the wheel),
and as such, as per the licensing restrictions by Live2D, is still the
property of Live2D.

The patch file (example/demo.patch) contains lines showing additions by
me, as well as deleted lines and unchanged lines for context. The deleted
and unchanged lines are obviously still owned by Live2D. For my additions,
where substantial enough for me to claim ownership, I release them under
the Do What the Fuck You Want to Public License, version 2. The full license
text can be found in LICENSE-WTFPL.txt.

All other files not mentioned above that I have provided in this repo
(i.e. not downloaded and placed here by you), *excluding* the two license
documents and files generated by Git, are also released under the Do What
the Fuck You Want to Public License, version 2, whose full license text
can be found in LICENSE-WTFPL.txt.

In order to use example program, or in any other way use this library
with the Live2D® Cubism SDK, you must agree to the license by Live2D Inc.
Their licenses can be found here:
<https://www.live2d.com/en/download/cubism-sdk/download-native/>.

This is not a license requirement, but if you find my library useful,
I'd love to hear from you! Send me an email at spam(at)adrianiainlam.tk --
replacing "spam" with the name of this repo :).

## Contributions

Contributions welcome! This is only a hobby weekend project so I don't
really have many environments to test it on. Feel free to submit
issues or pull requests on GitHub, or send questions or patches to me
(see my email address above) if you prefer email. Thanks :)
